Video:
http://youtu.be/KdzLiH3F6hE

It’s so good! This intro makes me so stoked about life every time! It’s so cool that it gives you that awesome roller coaster-themed buildup, then splashes you into an inspiring preview of what great things lie ahead. There’s intricately woven paths leading up and down green hills, and intricately woven roller coasters, and the screaming guests having the time of their lives riding them! Enthusiastically jogging around exploring the park!

You click to get started, you select the first option of scenarios on the list, and then... silence! An empty field. That opening preview is now but a vision as you are tasked with making something comparable from scratch.

Well alright, I’ll make a little circle of path here. How awesome is the sound for it, by the way! [sound of it] The clicking and clacking of the gui also echos in my mind. They’re deep, and impactful. It’s probably the best clicking noises in all of software! [noises]

Now to make a ride. We got transport rides, mild rides, roller coasters, thrill rides, water rides, and shops and stalls! The first thing I usually do is make the quintessential theme park attraction; the Merry-Go-Round.
Alright we’ll put it.... there, now it wants me to make an entrance, so I’ll put it... there, and now the exit I’ll put there. Let’s make a pathway here, now make a special queueing line path, which looks like a bathroom tile floor. Doesn’t it look so cool? The bright whites and blues contrasts everything else so strongly. The entrance and exit are also perfect; they’re miniature buildings of clean, homey looking stone with pleasant colors. They feel so inviting! If I was walking into that to buy my ticket before getting on a ride, it’d make me feel like I’m about to have a life changing experience! And if walked through that to leave, I’d feel like I just had a life changing experience!

Alright so we can change a bunch of options on this thing, but for now let’s just open it. And immediately, the deafening silence is broken, and you get beautiful carousel music! It plays some classic fairground song for a few minutes, then moves on to the next one and there’s a bunch of different songs it plays.

Okay well, I’m opening the park now, I’ll charge one dollar for now since there’s only one ride. Now some guests only want to ride mild rides, but others only want thrilling ones, so let’s make a ‘Scrambled Eggs’. Let’s get a Bathroom and put it somewhere convenient, and some food and soda... now make bunches of benches and crap tons of trash cans that the guests will need. Welcome to Forest Frontiers, faggot! Congratulation for coming all the way out into the middle of no where on foot to get here and be my first customer!

The merry-go-round music keeps being awesome, by the way.

Let’s hire some staff. Mechanics inspect and fix rides; security guards prevent crimes (though the only crimes that happen seem to be benches and light fixtures getting broken by unseeable vandals. Please tell me if you see anyone getting stabbed or raped), the entertainers basically generate a field of positivity that infects the guests with happiness, which can help keep your park rating up. The handyman will mow the grass, clean out trash cans and water flowers. They’re most famous for cleaning puke off the paths, because the guests of this world have the weakest stomachs ever.

By now you’ll notice the sound of the people in the park, accented perfectly by the merry-go-round.

Can I emphasize enough how much I love the music of this merry-go-round?? They’re all pre-existing classic melodies I know, but they sound so good in this game! I could listen to this dang merry-go-round for hours!

Time to make a roller coaster! I’ll start it here and make the whole ‘station platform’ part, then we make a straight path, make it go up, and make it crank the train upwards. You click this big button down here, which shows you exactly what piece you’re about to make.

Make it crank up and turn, which most coasters can’t do, but this one can; make it go doooown, make it go uuuup, and arouuund... and up and down to the left... then over and... that way and, down and... now you’ve got one of the tricky things which is to get it to connect back to the beginning, in a way that won’t be so fast and jarring that it dislocates your neck, but also won’t be too slow and boring. But hey I can work under pressure. Especially when that FREAKING MERRY GO ROUND music is playing!!

Let’s test it and see if it does well. There it goes! Can it make it? ...yeah! It NEVER gets old watching your coaster so slickly and awesomely going along the track you made. It feels like some sort of magic trick how it looks and moves so realistically.

The pre-rendered sprite graphics are all great. It all feels so classical and antique. All the graphics look grainy and saturated, but also polished. Everything looks so dignified! Every pixelated detail adds character to every frame. It feels like a real model toy set you found in your grandparents’ loft. This is a lot of what makes the reactivity of the gamespace feel so special! The guests are so likable and look so awesomely hilarious, that watching them walk around on the paths that you made gives you this tickly feeling!

Anyway, let’s see if the roller coaster is sucsexful. You want the excitement as high as possible, and the intensity and nausea as low as possible. ...alright, that’s good enough!

Well I’d like to see people riding it now, but it’s raining, and guests don’t like riding outdoor stuff when that happens. Oh hey I unlocked an Information Kiosk now, so I’ll put one here and let it sell Umbrellas to people. I’ll make the umbrellas black, so they can be emo, like the panda.

Alright rain’s gone, let’s do this! Here we go! *Joyful sigh* the screams the guests make in this game are magnificent.

Screw this let’s go to a new scenario. So, Bumbly Beach; it’s already got some rides. A wooden roller coaster, a merry-go-round, and a ferris wheel. Aaand outside the boundaries of the park there’s a whole neighborhood! As well as a beach. Pretty cool use of loads of details that don’t affect the scenario directly just to add even more atmosphere.

Listen to how good the sound design of this roller coaster is.

Riight, that should be enough basic attractions to get people to come over and spend money. Let’s make another coaster.

Excellent, I’ve unlocked Wonderland theme objects! So let’s add some scenery and theming.
...perfect.

Now I’ll make a monorail. That goes nowhere.

Moving on! Here’s a park I’ve had going for a while. As you can see I got a wooden roller coaster, a suspended coaster, a river rapids ride, a water slide, a steel coaster, a mini steel coaster, a wooden... crazy... mouse roller coaster, you get to feel so brilliant for having the brain power to weave such a complex, multi-layered--ohhh, the Merry-Go-Round broke down...

This is evergreen gardens; my favorite. It starts with just a bunch of trees, bushes and pathways, and is really big. Usually, I cut the pathways off into sections, that way the guests won’t be wandering around a big empty park; and I can let it expand and open up gradually. But this time I just let the whole thing open and I’m spreading all my resources super thin. I built a monorail to let the guests get around easily. This is really crazy because guests will be getting bored, hungry and lost wandering around like this.

This here is a park with a lot of trees, I’ve been doing quite a lot of work adding roller coasters and--OH! I achieved my objective! Thank you, thank you all! I love you! I-I I’m picking you up and... putting you back down like a... baby, or something! Excellent! I had a park value of over fifteen-thousand dollars at the end of October, Year 3! I shall engrave my name and be remembered forever!

Merry-go-round’s breaking down again. Uhhhhm. You okay?

I made this Car Ride at the top of this hill, so now I gotta connect the entrance and exit to the main pathway. I don’t wanna use too much path, that’d be expensive and tacky, you know. And uh... pay no attention to that over there. It’s uh, uhhhm...

I made a Go Kart track here, and... eah! I didn’t leave any room! Alright; get rid of this... go up... now it can work! Auh... dauh... alright that should be far enough! Oh but now I have to deal with the ground being in the way. Uhh, wait no I can just barely make it. So I’ll put that there, and that... there.

Now this calls for digging underground! Can you tell what’s going on? Because I can, because I’m a brilliant.

A lot of people will pull little pranks on their guests, like putting a pond of water outside the ride exits and watch as they all struggle and eventually drown. But I have more class and benevolence than that. I just send my guests directly to purgatory.

I can’t possibly express to you just how much I love the graphics in this game. The design and attention to detail is so strong, it feels so timeless.

Look at the drink stall; it’s all 80’s with its paint splatter, and it fits. There’s elements of classical and modern architecture, different cultures and themes, and they all work together so well that the aesthetic of this game is more than timeless; it’s atemporal! When does this game take place? It feels sort of beyond time itself!

~~~~

For a bit, let’s check out Rollercoaster Tycoon 2!

The menu is the same thing, and it has the same style of beautiful carnival song playing. This one, though, is freaking epic. It’s not content to just be catchy and fun, it has an intense build up as well! Just sort of roaming around at first, it’s almost creepy; like you’re wandering out all alone looking for somewhere with life and humanity. And then... you find it!

The accompanying imagery...isn’t very synced up--BUT EVENTUALLY it makes this menu into a celebration! Look at all the people and the building!

The music is backed up perfectly by how MAN those roller coasters are huge! This is magnificent!

The music keeps building up. It starts making pitter pattery noises, which is like the plateau of epicness itself!

It keeps going! Higher and higher, just like a roller coaster.

Kinda sucks that the images aren’t escalating with it but WHATEVER!

...okay you cut back to the original sad part of the video again. ANYWAY!

It then finally comes in for the crescendo! I like to time it just right and start my scenario exactly at the end, for maximum goosebumps!

.........STUPID LOADING-okay, so new park, and... oh right, I forgot. The scenarios in this game are uninspiring and completely flat.

Look at me! Infinity God powers! Hi there, boredom! I see you brought pointlessness with you! Where’s strategy and engagement? I haven’t seen them anywhere.

Let’s see how many antics I can squeeze out of this game.

Oh no... oh no oh no oh no oh no oh no oh no WHEW! I saved the day!

Imma put some nice scenery in this little spot here. How about a water jet, wiiiitthhhh an ice cube. That’ll work!

There: two. Two antics.

~~~~

Well that’s that! Now, Rollercoaster Tycoon 3!

Upfront, I must tell you that I’ve not played this game all that much. And what I’m going to be explaining, basically, is why that’s the case, and why I don’t particularly intend to play it a whole lot more.

So, my backstory! Probably in two-thousand-zero, I would’ve been six, my grandma bought a computer and RCT 1 came with it, so she gave it to me, and it quickly defined my existence. The second came out and I got the Triple-Thrill pack, and was like “well okay, it’s worth existing at least.” But I was still holding out for a true progression of the game; my imagination was soaked with ideas for things that could enhance, enrich and deepen its aesthetics and possibility space!

When RCT 3 was getting announced, at first I was like, wonderful! The first screenshot confirmed my obvious expectations: it’s in 3d! Excellent! This multiplies the possibilities!

However, my excitement was severely dampened the moment I saw the first commercial.

I felt like I was being sold a game that was cool and hip and trendy and totally in, ya’ll! It needs crunk music! I mean come on guys, it’s 2004! Start shakin’ it!

For me, it all centered around that breakdancing panda entertainer. I couldn’t believe I saw that, it made me laugh! You know how, when an old famous cartoon or video game character gets rebooted and is now all edgy and cool? This was my version of that!

Here was one of the iconic assets from the original game--(because pretty much EVERYTHING in that game is iconic)--getting down and funky.

Then there was that other thing, that I thought I’d be looking forward to, but was actually another turnoff when I heard it: “Now Ride the Rides!”

I’m going to put forth an extremely counterintuitive notion: Rollercoaster Tycoon is engrossing partly because of its lack of immersion.

You DON’T get to personally experience the rides you’ve created; you don’t get to know what your park looks like to really be in it; you don’t get to feel what your guests feel. I dunno! Something about that really gets to me on a deep level!

I’m always imagining what my park looks and feels like, and my imagination looks way better than the polygons of 2004.

So there I was! On the fence about whether or not I was excited for the sequel to my favorite game!

And then, something kinda knocked me off the fence. When reading about the game, at some point I heard that the ‘guests’ in RCT 3 are called ‘peeps’. I thought to myself...

...peeps, huh? Peeps.


I just imagined a marketing team, going “what do kids today think is cool??”

And I was ten, so this offended me. So, I wasn’t interested. My house didn’t have a computer strong enough for it anyway.

Even a few years later, when I could have easily checked it out, I still was too turned off by my immediate impression of it to give it a chance. (In fact, it may have been in 2007 that I was watching Youtube videos of it, and that’s when I first heard them say “peeps”, actually.)

At some point, maybe two-thousand-ten, or eleven, it was sitting there for four dollars in a thrift store, so I was like ‘sure’. I bought it, took it home, and immediately--didn’t play it and let it sit in my room for about a year. One afternoon I must have been in a ‘try new things’ mood, popped in the game, AND...found that it wasn’t compatible with my computer.

I thought to myself, “...whew! What a relief.” Until summer 2012, I had a new new computer, and this time it worked.

I clicked on it, got to the menu screen, opened a scenario and zoomed up into the--PEEPS, took it in for ten seconds, and was like, “nnnnNOPE!” I exited, put the disc back in the case, and didn’t play it again for two and a half years. For those of you doing the math; right after I finished my previous video, was when I finally sucked it up and made myself play this, just because I really wanted to make this video.

How could I be that turned off from this game? That’s the question I was asking myself as I was getting ready to play it again. It was long enough ago, I didn’t remember what it was about the first minute-and-a-half that made me so disgusted. So experiencing it again, was... interesting.

Before we get to the game proper, I’ll say that the cover art is awesome. Look at the logo! It’s sharp, smooth, and dynamic, while also perfectly falling into line with the originals. Clearly a huge improvement! The framing and color scheme of this is perfect! You could be looking at it from fifty feet away and your eyes would still get caught by those blues and purples! IT’S BEAUTIFUL! And that guy. That. FREAKING. Guy. He has haunted me for years. That is the most insane face ever drawn in human history. Why isn’t this guy in Smash Brothers yet??

Despite my disc being the original with no expansion content, the case it came in was the Gold Edition for some reason. Sucks that the people who bought the more complete versions didn’t get to have all those colors.

~~~~

ANYWAY!

The first thing you’ll notice, is the lack of a disclaimer about the use of this product, the disclaimer here is just typical genericism! Okay maybe only I noticed that, but I liked the thing about the readme and the manual; it was cool looking text! Anyway the second thing you’ll notice, if only subconsciously, is that the background is white, instead of black.

A black background conveys nothingness. It makes your eyes thirst for something to look at; it makes you gaze deeply into the screen; which builds suspense. If a black background is used just randomly somewhere, it can make your brain agonizingly looking for value and substance to fill that empty space.

A white background on the other hand, conveys saturation. Everything exists in the color white. It makes your brain feel that a lot information is here. With a white background, your eyes will tend to bounce around the screen, assuming there’s lots of worthwhile stuff to find. Informative youtube videos, for example, do well with white backgrounds. If you just get blank whiteness for no reason, your brain will be annoyed, unable to locate meaningful information.

So what I’m saying is, this game is already worse than the original, in every way.

Next, there’s a boring logo with a blurry, unappealing and static globe. This is the first graphic you see in the game; it sets the tone for the entire visual experience. Think about that.

We then abruptly get a coaster chain crank sound. It sounds more annoying and less cool than the originals, but whatever. Two seconds later you get the first serious red flag.

I winced when I first saw this animation.
One: It’s blurry as crap. Much less appealing than the pixelatedness of the originals
Two: The sound design on it is still deeply annoying to me. But I’ll get into that later
Three: It doesn’t make any physical sense. Where’s the frickin’nnnn track? There’s an aura of graph paper underneath the train, but not much else.
If we’re supposed to imagine the track and the supports, then how does it go in a loop de loop in a completely two-dimensional vector? A loop has to move over slightly for something to pass through it, unless this is supposed to be some futuristic ‘Steel Looping Trap Door Roller Coaster’
You may be thinking, “who cares about the physical logic of this part? It’s just a random, silly, roller-coastery thing to throw on the screen during the logo sequence” well you’re right, and that’s exactly the problem! You’re about to play a sim game about roller coasters, and the FIRST roller coaster thing you see is stupid, crappy looking, and doesn’t make sense.

Then there’s a boring, static fade over to an unmemorable logo.

Then a loud, flashy Atari sequence.

And then the logo. Even the logo isn’t as appealing on this white background.

Then it fades out, then the white fades to black. Which is awkward in itself; fading directly to black would be more appealing.

So this is what the opening of the game is; a series of logos fading in and out. The originals did so well to get you excited to play them, but this one is normal and phoned in. The originals were made by one guy and immediately feel special and invaluable, where the third one is made by a whole team of people with a larger budget and immediately feels like nothing.

So I was already doubtful by this point, and then... the main menu.

So, what we have here is a tacky slideshow of static, unapealing images, with an uninspired circular menu, set to lifeless, stock lobby music.

I was so utterly underwhelmed by how stupid this opening screen is, that it made me sigh with relief that I now knew refusing to play it for ten years was the right call.

What’s up with those kids?? Why have two random kids here? What does that do for the presentation? And more importantly, they look horrible! Why have the boy’s face covered in cotton candy? Kids being gross is one of the negative things about theme parks! How does cotton candy stick to your mouth like a paste like that? The only way I can imagine that working is it’s a blend of the cotton and his saliva. I double checked, and The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses actually has the lens of whether-or-not you want a kid with drool all over his face on the main menu of your game!

More importantly, what’s wrong with his face?? What kind of expression is that? His teeth are scary! What’s wrong with his eyes?? Those aren’t eyes, those are bottlecaps! How are those pieces of cotton candy floating on nothing?? Mull over the fact that the artist spent an extra 90 seconds to go out of his or her way to draw something completely pointless that doesn’t make sense.

The girl is a little better. That pose she’s making is pretty adorable, and I like her sense of fashion, but her expression is a little weird too! Why are her eyes different than the boy’s? What is she supposed to be thinking or feeling?? What kind of smile is that?? Where did she find a balloon that has the exact same expression as she does? Does she have a psychological attachment to that balloon for being the only friend who understands how she feels?? Does she carry it around with her everywhere all the time?? Are these the adopted autistic children of one of the designers who thought it’d be cute to draw them in the game??

When I experience the main menu of RCT1 and 2, I feel like I’m about to embark on a transcendent creative journey, building magical worlds and bringing laughs and cheers to masses of people I’ve never met, and make a lot of money doing it!

When I experience this main menu, I feel like I’m about to play a mediocre sim game I got from the five-dollar bin at Wal Mart.

Well, let’s play the game.

Oh look at that, you can’t click on the text of the button or the big white part here; it’s just the blue part that’s clickable. This is the kind of design flaw you usually get on barely unblammed flash games on Newgrounds!

Anyway, here’s the scenarios to choose from, each with their accompanying five-dollar clip art. Alright, begin!

Right off the bat, the trees look pretty good; the scenery and ground and all that stuff look pretty okay, but I’ll talk about all that later. For now, let’s take a look at the... peeps.

Look at them. They’re hideous. Pupilless dot eyes can work in 2d art, but in 3d they’ll need to have a lot of texture and a reflection of light in order to not look totally creepy. The eyes are bulging out, like a pair of buttons fastened onto their faces.

I assume the freakish, inhuman expressions they make with their mouths is a result of how few polygons you can render when there’s so many of them on screen at once. They should have just given them animated sprite mouths; 2d mouths on 3d characters has been proven to work just fine.

I don’t like their wardrobes. Something about their collective fashion sense feels phony. The guests have no defining features, which kicks on your subconscious imagination for what they’re really like. Once you can see exactly what they’re wearing, though, they all feel like empty shells without humanity.

Because they already look like genetic engineering byproduct rather than people, my brain doesn’t feel that they picked out the clothes and hair styles they’re wearing. My brain can only think about the graphic designers drawing textures all day until they have enough and moving on to the next project.

The macro win state of a typical action game is ‘saving the day’, and the micro win states are every enemy you defeat, or every platform you get past. Winning the game is vital to pull you along to the end, but those super little victories are what defines the moment-to-moment experience.

RCT’s macro win state is to achieve the park objective, and maybe to unlock every scenario. They’re relatively insignificant; a sim game, like any game, is MUCH more cruxed on the micro win states, which in this case are One: making money and Two: entertaining the guests.

If the guests are One: inhuman abominations who are impossible to like or care about, and Two: called PEEPS, the whole appeal of the game is gone with the wind!

There’s exactly one thing truly great added in this game. That is, the Park Inspector! He’s better than the peeps just by having eyelids and keeping his jaw shut. So he’s an actually good cartoon character, and every detail about him is perfect and glows with personality. Actually having a character walking through the park to report what’s going on is also a cool concept, instead of your notifications bar inexplicably knowing everything.

Sucks that the rest of the staff are all worse, though. The Entertainer looks fine, on par with the original, but the Handyman is now called a ‘janitor’, which is a lot less cool. The Handyman looked awesome and so perfect with his classic-style overalls, the Janitor is so generic with his jacket and his... fatness it makes me weep.
The Mechanic is now skinny and has big goggles, which looks kind of cool, but pales in comparison to the aura of expert craftsmanship that emanated from the original.

The original security guard is... a late nineteenth-century London police officer, who walks with his hands folded behind his back. Remember when I said how brilliantly atemporal this game is?

The 2004 security guard is just a guy with a shirt and tie; completely normal park officer looking person.

It’s all so uninspired! Aghhhhhghh!!!

~~~~

Now let’s talk about interface. RCT is a sim game where everything is done through menus; you don’t directly interact with this world at all. So the feeling and look of the menus are the feeling and look of the game.

Going back to the main menu, I really question why the designers decided to give it a circular curve. What’s the point of that? What does this communicate to you aesthetically? The original was all about showing you the game in action; since there’s only a few things to do, they tucked the buttons down at the bottom, and they took very little space, which was all they needed. But here, they covered it in a big old circle, which left a big empty space of nothing over here, which is why they added those kids.

This immediately cuts to the heart of the two design philosophies of these two games. The original’s goal is to be as simple and straightforward as possible, and the third’s is to be... smooth and curvy. It looks like I’m sitting in a waiting room, reading a flyer advertising lounge rugs. It feels like something you’d get in Mavis Beacon typing games or something.

In the original, everything is very square and feels like a solid block. It definitely feels like early-to-late-90’s Windows software, and it fits well. I guess it’s like, as a theme park manager, and businessman, you’d be looking at a lot of spreadsheets and clipboards, and it’d all look really officy and muted. If there was one skeuomorphic theme that would fit here, it’d be to make everything look like papers and sticky notes and binders and stuff. Just basic rectangles and earthy colors works really good too.

A button being a circle inherently means there’s less area of clickability; those edges around the button are now empty and pointless. So you’ve made clicking on buttons slightly more difficult for no reason.

Generally, the buttons of the in-game menu are too small. Why are they spaced so far apart? Making them larger to fill out that space would have been convenient. The clip art on the buttons are as uninspired as anything else. Path. Scenery. Shops. Rides. Info. The original’s aren’t exactly stunning either, but they click with me. It’s solid, memorable pixel art. Like I said, the menus are the game here; if they feel good, the game feels good.

I’m gonna build a ride.

[dramatic music plays]

[slow zoomed in shots of the cursor]

[build up with the cursor on the button]

[explosion when the click happens]

[switch over to RCT3]

Every single time I look over at this menu, I have no enthusiasm; I feel nothing.

I’m gonna build a ride...

[wonky doof music]

Also, here’s a button that makes you exit. But then in another part of the game, the same graphic is used for a button that initiates a tutorial. If you click on the tutorial button, and decide to leave, you’re going to be tricked, thanks to inconsistent graphics. Also, notice how the arrow is blurry, and is cut off at some of the edges; so they didn’t even resize or crop it right!

The thing about the original RCT’s interface that people seem to have a problem with is the windows. Almost everything you click opens a new menu, and I guess this gets a little cumbersome. Well obviously, if you WANT to do six things at once, it’s appropriate that there’s going to be a lot of menu on the screen. It’s never bothered me because the window-tab distribution mostly makes sense.

Most functions are very stand-alone. Like the map. Look it’s just, the map. Then there’s ground manipulation, and water manipulation. Is there any reason not to let the Scenery tool be its own window? It’s an entire object library, with multiple tabs of its own. The path tool is pretty complex; if it were part of some other menu, it’d be confusing and annoying.

Then it’s like, here’s the money window; tells you all about your finances. Here’s the research and development window; all about unlocking new rides. Here’s the rides window; about the general status of rides. Here’s the Park window; about the general status of the park. Here’s the guests; giving you in-depth stats on what they’re doing and thinking. The staff window is used to both manage, observe and hire the people who work for the park. Would you want these windows merged together? What would that accomplish? It’d just be arbitrary and weird.

The one legit annoyance with the multi-window system is having to individually close them all. Well guess what? He thoughtfully added a function in the hotkeys to close the most recent window. So I just map that to the space bar, and when I’m done with whatever I was doing, I just hold it down...[show it] and badaloom; The Roller Coaster Tycoon interface is now perfect!

As organisms that live on the surface of a planet, we’re used to having a sky or ceiling above us, a floor below us, and the stuff that’s level with us is what we interact with. Stuff at the top or bottom is just sort of there and unobtrusive, while the stuff in our field of space takes our attention. What I’m saying is, having all the buttons on the top, and all the extra information at the bottom makes it feel comfortable and out of the way. And then instead putting the main buttons on the left is really distracting and bothers me.

The bottom of the screen is where most of the main windows go when you open them. Yeah, like when you make a new ride, it becomes this media-player-shaped fischer price blob at the bottom left of the screen, and you can’t move it. The ride management console is on the bottom right, and also can’t be moved. Also, its buttons go around in a circle, which is annoying because instead of simply moving your cursor one of four directions to line up with a button, you have to curve around and get the perfect aiming. A very small increase in mental difficulty, but will really add up over time, and is worth criticizing because of its complete pointlessness. Again, what’s with the obsession with circles? They add nothing to the experience. Also why is everything colored dull sky blue? The original was subdued and varied; this makes everything mush together.

When you select one of the side buttons, it’ll usually open up a console that contains a library of objects. What’s weird is that, despite not using them nearly as much, you can actually move these windows around. Consistency!

Having all the data on the top could be fine I guess, but why have it in the middle instead of the corners? Because of the bland coloring and how everything is lined up together, this stat bar just feels like a daunting mess of numbers and letters that I don’t want to look at. I honestly almost never paid attention to the date or my park rating or my money because looking at this info display is so displeasurable.

The notifications come out of this... thing, and you can drag it in and out like this. This would work in a tablet interface, but with a mouse it takes a lot more time than if you just had a button that opened and closed it. This proves to me that the interface of this game was over-designed under the mentality that making it flashy and quirky and cool would automatically make it better.

~~~~

Oh I was gonna talk about the sound design, right? Well guess what, it’s all worse too. The peeps are just as unpleasant to listen to as they are to look at. Their voice clips are annoying, goofy and cartoon-like. The guests didn’t exactly sound like real people, but they sounded pure, and emotional. The low fidelity helps as well, it adds to that feeling of abstraction and distance from the world.

The crowd noises in the original are awesome and I could listen to them all day. You hear little weirdnesses in the background, like someone saying ‘tora tora tora’, followed by someone else saying ‘what on earth?’

Three’s crowd noises, well, you can obviously tell there’s multiple identical tracks being layered over one another.

When you go to build a roller coaster, listen to what sound effect they use. [play clip] Yeah, it’s the sound effect you get when building a piece. [play clip] So it always makes me feel like I accidentally built a piece somewhere. Not good design. Also, the build sound effect is too loud and annoying as well.

The clicking noises of the menus are so quiet that they get under your skin. Something about them was deeply annoying me, and I realized it was that the sounds are randomized. [play clip]

Isn’t that weird? It’s more needless overdone design; having randomized clicking noises just makes it confusing and pointless to my brain, and becomes aggravating.

~~~~

What completely does this game in for me, is the lighting. Because it wants to have a realistic day and night system, everything casts shadows and gets darker or brighter according to the sun. But because the technology isn’t capable of making the lighting look truly realistic, it instead just looks assy and horrible. In real life at sunset, things start to glow, become more saturated, and have a golden aura. In this game, sunset just gives everything a golden aura. You might as well pee on the monitor.

Having night time is cool I guess... but I can’t freaking see anything!! Awesome idea, guys!

Mid-day is the only time the game doesn’t look so blurry and gross that I can almost put it out of my mind, but you’ve still got everything casting hideous shadows all around. It still feels really off to me. It doesn’t feel like the light of the sun is hitting anything; nothing looks truly luminous like it does in real life. These subtle lighting issues make every single frame of this game tiresome and depressing to experience.

In the original, everything is just perfectly lit, all the time. Not realistic when you think about it, but it feels right, and is supremely pleasant to look at.

The graphics in general have no little of substance or weight to them. I dunno about you, but for me, when I put a ride on a plot of empty grass, it doesn’t feel like I’ve added anything to the space. I look at these giant machine contraptions in my park, and I feel this emptiness inside. I chalk this up to two things.

One: The texture design. Look at the Merry-Go-Round here; it looks faded and washed-out from the sun. Check out the gravitron; if you get up close, you can see how weirdly dirty it looks. Why would you want it to look like that? Or the chair swing; look at this big, gross splotch of dirt in the middle here. All the rides in this game look old and grimy; they’re not pristine and polished like the rides of the original.
I imagine they made them look this way because in a realistic 3d-world, you can’t abstract the visuals like that; it can’t look shiny and perfect when you’re able to zoom right up into it. It’s good that they recognized this, and tried to make it look believable, but it’s still unpleasant looking, and besides...

Two: They don’t feel solid. People were applauding the engine here back in 2004, and it is impressive how many full-3d objects are moving on screen at once. But it’s still true that, when you zoom up close to one of the rides especially, they look a little papery.
If you notice when the chairswing goes up, how it looks like it’s made of cardboard. Most games by 2004 had the polygons to render something that looked like it had real density and weight to it. Gen 5 games’ origami structures worked a lot better, and it was partially because of their blurry, pixelated textures. When both the structure and the texture of an object are simplistic and blocky, it gives that sense of abstraction, and makes the world feel like it’s made of play-doh, which is at least solid.
This stuff is a weird in-between, and as a result feels flat.

The original is all pre-rendered 3d graphics, and it gets to have much more solid structure as a result.

So building and positioning rides doesn’t feel satisfying, because they don’t have weight, and they don’t look cool. What about roller coasters?

Well, they look solid I guess. They’re kinda...bland though.

Zooming into the sprites of the original as far as you can, you’ll see the surface of the track has very intense color contrasts. I selected ‘light blue’ for the color scheme of this track, and you get really dark blue for the edges, and really light blue for the middle. If you follow the purple part, notice how the beams that are supposed to be facing the sun have bright lines going through them. The wooden roller coaster’s track has a ton of shades of brown just on the edges. At a distance, all this detail makes the coaster feel extremely textured and real. The detail and lighting is so strong that it holds up even after I put it through filters trying to make it look more simplistic.

As for the new coasters, well they do actually have detailed, realistic steel and wood textures if you get up close. But the thing is, once you zoom out, you can’t see those textures, and it just looks like nothing. Again, that’s the value of prerendered sprites and a fixed isometric camera; the artist knows the exact distance at which you’ll be viewing the graphics, so it can be designed with the perfect level of detail.
These textures have the same problem as the other rides, in that it just looks like a polygonal shape with a texture on it, and most of the textures try to make the coaster look old and dirty.

Even the roller coaster in action is as dull as everything else. In the original, the trains feel kinetic, and fast, and intense. They’re as polished and detailed as the rest of the graphics, so watching them move and animate with such complexity is a spectacle in itself. They actually benefit from the limited frame rate; having to make such sharp and snappy movements to get around gives them a look of intensity. They don’t rigidly slide along the track; they jitter and fidget around; it makes them look unhinged and incredible. Different coasters will move around slightly differently based on the physics of that particular type. Personality! Energy! Creativity! Excitement! Fun!

Rct3’s coasters just feel like an object moving along a vector. It’s completely smooth, and slow. They never even get that fast! Also, the sound design is worse as well big surprise.

The original’s sound ramps up and down in pitch and speed. The new ones’ are flat and always the same.

~~~~

So there you go, that’s everything I don’t like about the second sequel to Rollercoaster Tycoon. A lot of the problems I’ve explained can be--to varying extents--chalked up to the limitations that real-time-rendered full-3d has under pre-rendered isometric sprites. But the main cause of this game’s ugliness is provably that the artists and designers idiopathically didn’t do a good job with their resources. There’s some stuff in this game that looks awful for no reason. Look at the hamburger stall. That is the grossest, most hideous thing I’ve ever seen in my life. It looks moldy and radioactive, and it’s way smaller at the bottom for some reason.

The tough fact is, any sequel by a multi-man team is going to come short of the visuals of the originals just a little bit, because Chris Sawyer is clearly a god of PC graphics. Look at this guy’s previous work; it’s all so detailed and rich!

The third game is such an aesthetic downgrade that I’d compare it to the feelings of playing boilerplate shovelware.

One could then ask, do the new features and concepts introduced in the third game make up for all those shortcomings? Well guess what, there pretty much aren’t any. RCT3 is more-or-less a remake of the original, but now with a new look in 3d. So since the new look is awful, there’s not much value in this game.

There’s a lot of little things. Like each scenario has three tiered objectives, instead of just one. If I cared about the game at all, this would be cool. The coasters can go in a few more curves than they could before. If the coasters were fun or satisfying at all, this would be cool.

The peeps move together in groups, as friends or couples or families (always heterosexual couples, dontchaknow! This was a more innocent time of history in 2004) If I cared about the peeps at all, this would be interesting and I’d figure out how this affects the strategy.

There’s fireworks in the game, and you can customize the frick out of them. But I swear I cannot pump enough blood to my brain to figure it out, this game bores me so much.

~~~~

When Rollercoaster was coming to 3d, people were obviously excited. But what specifically were we excited about? What do 3d graphics have to offer to this game? Well I see it as two things:

One: Immersion. If you can get all up in the park’s face, it feels real and affects you more as a human being.

Two: Complexity and specificity of design. In real life, the personality of a theme park comes through in the subtleties just as much as it does in the buildings and rides. Just the sensation of going up or down a pathway can define the experience and mood. The exact placement and shape of a bridge can affect the feeling of going over a stream.

Navigating the real world is all about landmarks and engaging the flow of an environment’s design. Cinderella’s castle is obviously used as a key visual instrument in guiding and directing the guests through the park. When they were working on Disneyland, Walt would be walking around to make sure everything looked right, and then would squat down and waddle around like that for a while, because he wanted to make sure it also looked right from the perspective of a kid.

My point is, Rollercoaster Tycoon captures very little of that. Like I said, it’s a detached experience, and more importantly everything is stiff and blocky. You could do something like make a pond and build a bridge over it, but it’s primitive to say the least.

If everyone in the world was me, and theme park sim games sold as well as Call of Duty and Pokémon combined, they’d have probably gotten enough development resources to be getting really advanced in this regard by now. As it is, just the idea that the third RCT game was going to be in full-3d sounded like a big step in the right direction.

But as I said, most of the new design features are one-note, superficial additions. The only thing that approaches being a deep, fundamental enhancement is the much, much more advanced ground manipulation. This alone could make possible a lot of that worldly depth I described, but the rest of the game is still not designed to accommodate it. Let me explain.

Interestingly enough, the scenarios in this game are all still mostly really flat! And in the event that there’s lots of hills, it’s suggested that you build pathways and everything over the hills, which isn’t what I was talking about.

Some get close. Like this Egyptian-themed one that starts off with a long path down a steep cliff, leading to a valley between two epic mountains. This is cool and takes advantage of the full-3d and terraforming features! But, the actual park area is still mostly flat, and the mountains are way too steep to build anything on.

Completely dissatisfied with the scenarios at my disposal, I went and made my own. Somewhat inspired by the aesthetics of Wii Golf, I designed it with the intention of making a park that’s all about slopes and curves and complex terrain.

In trying to make a park with this scenario, I learned that building anything on complex terrain is retardedly difficult. [show clip] And a lot of that is just because of how awkwardly designed the path tool is here. You have to click the point of where you’re going to MAKE the path, then click forward to make it, then click the arrows to reorient its trajectory. Doing this on uneven ground is really tricky. And I’m pretty sure this doesn’t affect the way peeps experience the park either, so it’s not like it even has a point beyond looking cool.

Whether the ground is this high, or this high, or this high, or THIS high doesn’t make a real difference to the experience like it would in real life, in this game it just looks nicer.

So in other words, Rollercoaster Tycoon 3 has no significant redeeming qualities. In my opinion.

.....................yep!

~~~~

Anyway, I’m just gonna go back to the first one again! I’ve still never beaten all the scenarios, and have barely touched the expansions! This is Dinky Park; you have to build a park with as little space as possible. You can expand over in this direction, but you have to go either above or below the road.

I don’t want this path here. [delete path] Oh! Oh crud, wait a second, you...

SOURCE: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdzLiH3F6hE&feature=youtu.be
